## Stop-The-World Events

- The pauses that applications suffer during garbage collection are due to what are known as stop-the-world events. For garbage collectors to operate it is necessary, for practical engineering reasons, to periodically stop the running application so that memory can be managed. Depending on the algorithms, different collectors will stop-the-world at specific points of execution for varying durations of time. To bring an application to a total stop it is necessary to pause all the running threads. Garbage collectors do this by signaling the threads to stop when they come to a “safepoint”, which is a point during program execution at which all GC roots are known and all heap object contents are consistent. Depending on what a thread is doing it may take some time to reach a safepoint. Safepoint checks are normally performed on method returns and loop back edges, but can be optimized away in some places making them more dynamically rare. For example, if a thread is copying a large array, cloning a large object, or executing a monotonic counted loop with a finite bound, it may be many milliseconds before a safepoint is reached. Time To Safepoint (TTSP) is an important consideration in low-latency applications. This time can be surfaced by enabling the ‑XX:+PrintGCApplicationStoppedTime flag in addition to the other GC flags.
- Note: **For applications with a large number of running threads, when a stop-the-world event occurs a system will undergo significant scheduling pressure as the threads resume when released. Therefore algorithms with less reliance on stop-the-world events can potentially be more efficient.**
